## Citation

Delingpole, J., 2021. Study Disputes That Earth Is in a ‘Climate Emergency’. [online] Breitbart. Available at: <https://www.breitbart.com/europe/2021/02/07/delingpole-study-disputes-earth-climate-emergency/> [Accessed 24 Oct. 2021].

# Claim Analysis: Study Disputes that Earth is in a ‘Climate Emergency'

The article I found most compelling is “Study Disputes that Earth is in a ‘Climate Emergency’”. As stated above, this article was particularly interesting because it uses a study authored by Indur Golankey to back its claims that most of the indicators of a climate emergency are not credible. For example, the article dismisses the notion that increased carbon dioxide emissions are bad for the planet, proposing instead that they contribute to “global greening” and that they provide fertilizers which augment food production (Delingpole, 2021). Furthermore, the author claims that overall, carbon dioxide has increased human wellbeing and that our quality of life has never been better (Delingpole, 2021). This leads to another key focus of this article; that human welfare has only improved since industrialization contrary to the claims made by climate scientists. They argue that mortality from extreme weather events has declined significantly since the beginning of the 20th century, that hunger rates have declined, and that life expectancy has doubled since the start of industrialization, among other things (Delingpole, 2021). They then go on to say that climate disasters and the economic damages they cause have not been getting worse, and that fears of sea level rise are overblown. The article then argues that this study will be hard to dismiss due to Goklany being a member of the U.S. delegation that established the IPCC, helping to develop its First Assessment report and later serving as an IPCC reviewer (Delingpole, 2021).

While this article may first appear based off a credible source, after looking deeper into the author of the report and their claims it is easy to see where the arguments fall apart easily. For the most part this report cherry picks certain statistics and pieces of information to make a compelling argument. For example, the report sites that fatality due to weather events has remained constant or has declined since the 1920’s. However, this is largely due to improvements to infrastructure and warning systems and does not reflect a reduced effect of climate change on these weather events (Daniel Pavlinovic, 2021). In fact, all signs point to extreme weather events being exacerbated by climate change. Warmer oceans lead to more moisture in the atmosphere, ultimately leading to more intense tropical cyclones, and total area burned by wildfires in the U.S. has increased significantly in the past decade(Liu et al., 2019). The author tends to make large blanket statements without giving much context and therefore sets up the reader to be misled. For example, they write that, “evidence directly contradicts claims that increased carbon dioxide has reduced human wellbeing”. While it is true increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide alone do not directly affect human health, given that the pollution and warming associated with carbon dioxide release does directly affect human health, this statement is incredibly misleading.  However, the most condemning thing about the article is that the author of the original study cited is not a climate scientist and is in fact an electrical engineer who has not conducted any genuine peer-reviewed research in the areas that he is writing about. Furthermore, this study does not include any original research and was not published in a reputable scientific journal or website. This reduces the credibility of the article significantly as it is clear that the information presented was not personally vetted and implies bias in the writing.

## Works Cited

Daniel Pavlinovic, 2021. *Climate and weather related disasters surge five-fold over 50 years, but early warnings save lives*. [online] UN News. Available at: <https://news.un.org/en/story/2021/09/1098662> [Accessed 24 Oct. 2021].

Liu, M., Vecchi, G.A., Smith, J.A. and Knutson, T.R., 2019. Causes of large projected increases in hurricane precipitation rates with global warming. *Climate and Atmospheric Science*, 2(1), pp.1–5. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41612-019-0095-3.


